T I C L E S scenario is akin to the magnetic furnace model proposed by Axford and and to ideas invoking We adopt from the furnace model the idea that reconnection plays a major role, as it will release plasma, set free magnetic energy, and produce Alfve´n waves. However, our model of the nascent solar wind is intrinsically 3-D, and the magnetic field geometry is derived empirically. The plasma is accelerated in the funnel above a critical height of 5 Mm but originates below from the neighboring loops. The initial heating of the solar wind plasma is achieved in the side loops. and Notes other (that is, the dependence of each biomolecule in the pathway on other biomol- ecules) in the form of an influence diagram. These models can be automatically derived from experimental data through a statistically founded computational procedure termed net- work inference. Although the relationships are statistical in nature, they can sometimes be in- terpreted as causal influence connections when interventional data are used; for example, with are several attractive properties of Bayesian networks for the inference of sig- naling pathways from biological data sets. Bayesian networks can represent complex stochastic nonlinear relationships among mul- interacting molecules, and their proba- bilistic nature can accommodate noise that is inherent to biologically derived data. They can describe direct molecular interactions as well as indirect influences that proceed through additional unobserved components, a property crucial for discovering previously unknown effects and unknown components. Therefore, very complex relationships that likely exist in Engineering Division, Massachusetts Insti- of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. University School of Medicine, The Baxter Laboratory of Genetic Pharmacology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford, CA 94305, Medical School, Department of Genet- ics, Boston, MA 02115, USA. authors contributed equally to this work. whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: lauffen@mit.edu (D.A.L.); gnolan@stanford.edu (G.P.N.) learning was applied for the automated derivation of causal influ- ences in cellular signaling networks. This derivation relied on the simultaneous measurement of multiple phosphorylated protein and phospholipid components in thousands of individual primary human immune system cells. Perturbing these cells with molecular interventions drove the ordering of connections between pathway components, wherein Bayesian network computational methods auto- matically elucidated most of the traditionally reported signaling relationships and predicted novel interpathway network causalities, which we verified ex- perimentally. Reconstruction of network models from physiologically relevant primary single cells might be applied to understanding native-state tissue signal- ing biology, complex drug actions, and dysfunctional signaling in diseased cells. cues trigger a cascade of infor- mation flow, in which signaling molecules become chemically, physically, or location- ally modified; gain new functional capabil- ities; and affect subsequent molecules in the cascade, culminating in a phenotypic cellular Mapping of signaling pathways typ- ically has involved intuitive inferences arising from the aggregation of studies of individual pathway components from diverse experimen- tal systems. Although pathways are often con- ceptualized as distinct entities responding to triggers, it is now understood that in- cross-talk and other properties of reflect underlying complexities that cannot be explained by the consideration of individual pathways or model systems in isola- tion. To properly understand normal cellular responses and their potential disregulation in disease, a global multivariate approach is re- a form of graphical models, have been proffered as a promising framework for modeling complex systems such as cell signaling cascades, be- cause they can represent probabilistic depen- dence relationships among multiple interacting Bayesian network models the effects of pathway components on VOL 308 22 APRIL 2005 T I C L E S pathway architectures can be mod- eled and discovered. The Bayesian network inference algorithm constructs a graph dia- gram in which nodes represent the measured and arcs (drawn as lines between nodes) represent statistically meaningful rela- tions and dependencies between these mole- cules. When inferring a Bayesian network Schematic of Bayesian network in- ference using multidimensional flow cytometry data. Nine different perturbation conditions were applied to sets of individual cells (Table 1). A multiparameter flow cytometer simultaneously recorded levels of 11 phosphoproteins and phospholipids in individual cells in each perturbation data set (Table 2). This data conglomerate was subjected to Bayesian network analysis, which extracts an influence diagram reflecting dependencies and causal relationships in the underlying Bayesian networks for hypothetical proteins X, Y, Z, and W. (a) In this X influences Y, which, in turn, influences both Z and W. (b) The same network as (a), except Simulated data that could reconstruct the influence connections in (B) (this is a simplified demonstration of how Bayesian networks operate). Each dot in the scatter plots represents the amount of two phosphorylated proteins in an individual cell. (a) Scatter plot of simulated measurements of phosphorylated X and Y shows correlation. (b) Inter- ventional data determine directionality of influence. X and Y are correlated under no manipulation (blue dots). Inhibition of X affects Y (yellow dots) and inhibition of Y does not affect X (red dots). this indicates that X is consistent with being an upstream parent node. (c) Simulated of Y and Z. (d) A noisy but distinct correlation is observed between simulated mea- surements of X and Z. experimental data, the network infer- ence algorithm aims to discern a model that closely predicts the observations made. The algorithm approximates the most likely mod- els by traversing the space of possibilities via single-arc changes that improve the score. There is a trade-off between simple models and those that accurately capture the em- pirical distribution observed in the data. The employed Bayesian scoring metric captures this trade-off; thus, a high-scoring model is a both simple and accurate representation of Bayesian networks have been applied to gene expression data for the study and discovery of genetic regulatory pathways However, because of the probabilis- tic nature of the Bayesian modeling approach, effective inference requires many observations of the system. Thus, such studies have often been limited by data sets of insufficient size; for instance, those made up of measurements based on averaged samples derived from heter- ogeneous cell populations (a necessary limita- tion when using lysates from large numbers contrast to lysate-based methods, intra- allows more quantitative simultaneous obser- vations of multiple signaling molecules in many thousands of individual cells. Hence, it is an especially appropriate source of data for Bayesian network modeling of signaling path- ways; for instance, because it allows for simul- taneous measurement of biological states in more native contexts, as well as for large sam- ple sets. Flow cytometry can be used to quan- measure a given protein s expression level and can also include measures of protein- modification states such as phosphorylation Because each cell is treated as an independent observation, flow cytometric data provide a statistically large sample that could enable Bayesian network inference to accu- rately predict pathway structure (Fig. 1A). As demonstrated in this article, interrogating sig- networks in populations of single cells provides a robust source of statistically power- ful dependencies that can be used to automat- ically infer signaling causality using Bayesian network computation. Bayesian networks with 1B (panel a) presents a sample Bayesian network representing four hypothetical biomolecules. A directed arc from X to Y is interpreted as a causal influence from X onto Y; in this case, we say X is Y’s ‘‘parent’’ in the network. In case that X activates Y, where activation can be read out by phosphorylation status, we expect and observe correlation in levels of phosphorylation as measured by flow cytom- etry (simulated data in Fig. 1C, panel a). Criti- cal to causal interpretation of Bayesian network is the inclusion of interventional cues activating or inhibiting) that directly APRIL 2005 VOL 308 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org the states of the measured molecules (Fig. 1C, panel b) and strengthen inference di- rectionality. For instance, inhibition of mole- cule X might lead to inhibition of both X and Y, whereas inhibition of molecule Y leads only to inhibition of Y. Thus, we would infer X to be upstream of Y as shown in Fig. 1B, panel a. Moreover, because flow cytometry can mea- sure multiple molecules within each cell, it is possible to identify complex causal influence relationships involving multiple proteins. Con- sider the signaling cascade from X onto Y onto Z (Fig. 1B, panel a), where correlation exists between the measured activities of each pair, including between X and Z (Fig. 1C, panel d). Bayesian network inference yields the most concise model, automatically excluding arcs based on dependencies already explained by the model. Thus, despite the correlation between them, the arc between X and Z is omitted, because the X-Y and the Y-Z relationships explain the X-Z correlation. Similarly, because Z and W are both activated by their common cause Y, we expect their activities to be cor- related, but no arc appears between them be- cause their respective arcs from Y mediate this dependency. Finally, consider a scenario in which molecule Y was not measured. The statistical correlation between the observed activities of X and Z does not depend on ob- serving Y; therefore, their correlation would still be detected. An indirect arc would be de- tected from X onto Z (Fig. 1B, panel b). this concept to a real data set, we applied Bayesian network analysis to mul- tivariate flow cytometry data. Data were col- lected after a series of stimulatory cues and inhibitory interventions (Table 1), with cell reactions stopped at 15 min after stimulation by fixation, to profile the effects of each con- dition on the intracellular signaling networks cells, down- stream of CD3, CD28, and LFA-1 activation (Fig. 2 shows a currently accepted consensus network). We made flow cytometry mea- of 11 phosphorylated proteins and phospholipids [Raf phosphorylated at posi- tion S259, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) Erk1 and Erk2 phosphorylated at T202 and Y204, p38 MAPK phosphorylated at T180 and Y182, Jnk phosphorylated at T183 and Y185, AKT phosphorylated at S473, Mek1 and Mek2 phosphorylated at S217 and S221 (both isoforms of the protein are recog- nized by the same antibody), phosphorylation of protein kinase A (PKA) substrates [cAMP response element–binding protein (CREB), calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), caspase-10, and caspase-2] containing a consensus phosphorylation motif, on Y783, phosphorylation of PKC on S660, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate Each independent T I C L E S signaling network and points of intervention. This is a graphical illustration of the conventionally accepted signaling molecule interactions, the events measured, and the points of intervention by small-molecule inhibitors. Signaling nodes in color were measured directly. Signaling nodes in gray were not measured, but are presented to place the signaling nodes that were measured within contextual cellular pathways. The interventions classified as activators are colored green and inhibitors are colored red. Intervention site of action is indicated in the figure. Arcs are used to illustrate connections between signaling molecules; in some cases, the connections may be indirect and may involve specific phosphorylation sites of the signaling molecules (see Table 3 for details of these connections). This figure contains a synopsis of signaling in mammalian cells and is not representative of all cell types, with inositol signaling corelationships being particularly complex. biological effects of perturbations employed. The left-hand column lists the specific reagents used in each perturbation condition, and the right-hand column classifies the reagent class into either a general perturbation that overall stimulated the cell or a specific perturbation that acted on a (ii) (iv) anti- (vii) cyclic adenosine inhibitor class perturbation: Activates T cells and induces proliferation and cytokine production. Induced signaling through the T cell receptor (TCR), activated ZAP70, Raf, Mek, Erk, and PKC. The TCR signaling converges on transcription NFAT, and AP-1 to initiate IL-2 transcription. perturbation: LFA-1 signaling and contributes to CD3/CD28 that converges on AP-1 and NFAT transcriptional activity. perturbation: cAMP analog that activates PKA. PKA can regulate NFAT and T cell commitment processes. perturbation: Binds inositol pleckstrin domain of AKT and blocks AKT translocation to the membrane where normally AKT becomes phosphorylated and 5 mM]. Inhibition of AKT and phosphorylation of AKT substrates are needed to enhance cell survival. manner (ATP and Erk substrates). arresting T cell proliferation and cytokine synthesis. nm) in a Inhibits activation of Erk, perturbation: PMA activates PKC and initiates some aspects of T cell cell activation. nM). Inhibits PKC and arrests perturbation: Inhibits phosphoinositide hydrolysis. Inhibits PIP2 production disrupts phosphoinositol turnover. perturbation: Phosphatidylinosital 3-kinase (PI3K inhibitor. Inhibits PI3K and activation of AKT. VOL 308 22 APRIL 2005 T I C L E S in this data set consists of quantita- tive amounts of each of the 11 phosphorylated molecules, simultaneously measured from sin- For purposes of illustration, examples of actual fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) data plotted in prospective corelationship form are shown in fig. S1. In most cases, this reflects the activation state of the kinases monitored, or in the levels of these secondary messenger molecules in primary cells, under the condition measured. Nine stimula- tory or inhibitory interventional conditions were The complete data sets were analyzed with the Bayesian network structure high-accuracy human primary T cell resulting de novo causal network model was inferred (Fig. 3A) with 17 high-confidence causal arcs between various components. To evaluate the validity of this model, we compared the mod- el arcs (and absent potential arcs) with those described in the literature. Arcs were catego- rized as the following: (i) expected, for con- nections well-established in the literature that have been demonstrated under numerous con- ditions in multiple model systems; (ii) reported, for connections that are not well known, but for which we were able to find at least one literature citation; and (iii) missing, which indi- cates an expected connection that our Bayesian network analysis failed to find. Of the 17 arcs in our model, 15 were expected, all 17 were either expected or reported, and 3 were missed Table 3 enumerates the probable paths of influence corresponding to model arcs determined by surveying published reports. of the known connections from our model are direct enzyme-substrate rela- tionships (Fig. 3B) (PKA to Raf, Raf to Mek, and one has a relationship of recruitment leading to phos- In almost all cases, direction of causal influence was correctly in which case the arc was inferred in the reverse direction). All the influences are contained within one global model; thus, the causal di- rection of arcs is often compelled so that these are consistent with other components in the model. These global constraints allowed de- tection of certain causal influences from mole- cules that were not perturbed in our assay. For instance, although Raf was not perturbed in any of the measured conditions, the meth- od correctly inferred a directed arc from Raf to Mek, which was expected for the well- characterized Raf-Mek-Erk signal transduc- tion pathway. In some cases, the influence of one molecule on another was mediated by in- termediate molecules that were not measured in the data set. In the results, these indirect connections were detected as well (Fig. 3B, panel b). For example, the influence of PKA and PKC on the MAPKs p38 and Jnk likely proceeded via their respective (unmeasured) MAPK kinase kinases. Thus, unlike some other approaches used to elucidate signaling networks [for example, protein-protein inter- that provide static bio- chemical association maps with no causal links, our Bayesian network method can de- tect both direct and indirect causal connections and therefore provide a more contextual pic- ture of the signaling network. feature demonstrated in our mod- el is the ability to dismiss connections that are already explained by other network arcs (Fig. 3B, panel c). This is seen in the Raf- Mek-Erk cascade. Erk, also known as p44/42, is downstream of Raf and therefore dependent on Raf, yet no arc appears from Raf to Erk, because the connection from Raf to Mek and the connection from Mek to Erk explain the dependence of Erk on Raf. Thus, an indirect arc should appear only when one or more intermediate molecules is not present in the data set, otherwise the connection will proceed this molecule. The intervening molecule may also be a shared parent. For example, the phosphorylation statuses of p38 and Jnk are correlated (fig. S2), yet they are not di- rectly connected, because their shared parents (PKC and PKA) mediate the dependence be- tween them. Although we cannot know wheth- er an arc in our model represents a direct or indirect influence, it is unlikely that our model contains an indirect arc that is mediated by any molecule observed in our measurements. Correlation exists between most molecule pairs in this data set [per Bonferroni corrected (fig. S2)], which can occur with close- ly connected pathways. Therefore, the relative lack of arcs in our model (Fig. 3A) contrib- uted greatly to the accuracy and interpret- ability of the inferred model. more complex example is the influence of PKC on Mek, which is known to be me- diated by Raf (Fig. 3B, panel d). PKC is known to affect Mek through two paths of influence, each mediated by a different ac- tive phosphorylated form of the protein Raf. Although PKC phosphorylates Raf directly at S499 and S497, this event is not detected by our measurements, because we use only an antibody specific to Raf phosphorylation Therefore, our algo- rithm detects an indirect arc from PKC to Mek that is mediated by the presumed un- measured intermediate Raf phosphorylated The PKC-to-Raf arc represents an indirect influence that proceeds via an unmeasured molecule, presumed to be We discussed above the ability of our approach to dismiss redundant arcs. In this case, there are two paths leading from PKC to Mek, because each path corresponds to a separate means of influence from PKC to Mek: one via Raf phosphorylated at S259 and the other through Raf phosphorylated at S497 and S499. Thus, neither path is redun- dant. This result demonstrates the distinction that this analysis is sensitive to specific phos- network inference Network inferred from flow cytometry data represents ex- pected outcomes. This network rep- resents a model average from 500 high-scoring results. High-confidence arcs, appearing in at least 85% of the networks, are shown. For clarity, the names of the molecules are used to represent the measured phospho- Inferred network demonstrates several fea- of Bayesian networks. (a) Arcs in the network may correspond to direct events or (b) indirect influ- ences. (c) When intermediate mol- ecules are measured in the data set, indirect influences rarely appear as an additional arc. No additional arc is added between Raf and Erk because the dependence between Raf Erk is dismissed by the connection between Raf and Mek, and be- Mek and Erk (for instance, see Fig. 1C). (d) Connections in the model contain phosphorylation site–specificity information. Because Raf on S497 and S499 was not measured in our data set, the connection between PKC and the measured Raf phosphorylation site is indirect, likely proceeding via Ras. The connection between PKC the undetected Raf phosphorylation on S497 and S499 is seen as an arc between PKC and Mek. APRIL 2005 VOL 308 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org sites on molecules and is capable of detecting more than one route of influence between molecules. well-established influence connec- Akt. Bayes- ian networks are constrained to be acyclic, so if the underlying network contains feedback loops, we cannot necessarily expect to un- cover all connections (fig. S3). Availability of suitable temporal data could possibly per- mit this limitation to be overcome using dy- confirmation of predicted influence connec- measured in pathway and specificity antibodies used. The left-hand column shows target molecules measured in this study that were assayed using monoclonal antibody to the target residues (site of phosphorylation or Erk1 and Jnk AKT Mek1 and specificity at S259 Phosphorylation at T202 and Y204 at T180 and Y182 Phosphorylation at T183 and Y185 Phosphorylation at S473 Phosphorylation at S217 and S221 proteins and peptides con- taining a phospho-Ser/Thr res- idue with arginine at the –3 position only at C-terminal residue homol- at Y783 in our model are not well established in the literature: PKC on PKA and Erk on Akt. To probe the validity of these proposed causal influences, we searched for reports in the lit- erature. Both connections have previously been reported: the PKC-to-PKA connection in rat ventricular myocytes and the Erk-to-Akt con- An important goal of our work was to test the abil- ity of Bayesian network analysis of flow cytom- etry data to correctly infer causal influences from unperturbed molecules within a network. For example, Erk was not directly acted on by any activator or inhibitor in the sample sets, yet Erk showed an influence connection to Akt. Our model thus predicts that direct perturba- tion of Erk would influence Akt (Fig. 4A). On the other hand, although Erk and PKA are correlated (fig. S2), the model predicts that perturbation of Erk should not influence PKA. As a test of these predictions (Fig. 3A), we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhi- bition of either Erk1 or Erk2, and the amounts of S473-phosphorylated Akt and phosphoryl- ated PKA were then measured. In accord with was reduced after siRNA was not (Fig. 3, B and C). Akt phos- phorylation was not affected by the inhibition of Erk2. The connection between Erk1 and Akt may be direct or indirect, involving mediatory molecules yet to be understood, but the con- nection is supported by both the model and the validation experiment. of accurate inference: network interventions and sufficient numbers of features distinguish our data from the majority of currently attainable biological data sets. First, we simultaneously measured multiple protein states in individ- ual cells, eliminating population-averaging molecular pathways of influence represented by arcs in the model. Shown are the possible pathways of influence inferred from the data, with the connection shown in Fig. 3A and the molecules (in bold) that might mediate indirect influences. E, expected; R, reported. See text for further discussion. Specific phosphorylation sites are included as subscripts. See table S1 for citations that support the inferences. Y Mek Jnk p38 PKA Raf Mek Erk p38 Mek Akt Erk path p38 MKKs Y Y YY YY Y Y Y Y YY Y PKC PKC PKC PKC PKA PKA PKA PKA Direct phosphorylation Direct phosphorylation Direct hydrolysis to IP3 Recruitment leading to phosphorylation Precursor-product Direct or indirect Erk p38 Indirect Indirect Indirect Indirect Direct Indirect Indirect Indirect Direct Indirect Direct Direct Reversed E E E R E E E E E E E E E E R T I C L E S that could obscure interesting corre- lations. Second, because the measurements were on single cells, thousands of data points were collected in each experiment. This feature constitutes a tremendous asset for Bayesian network modeling, because the large number of observations allows for accurate assessment of underlying probabilistic relationships, and therefore allows for the extraction of complex relationships from noisy data. Third, interven- tional assays generated hundreds of individual data points per intervention (because flow cytometry measures single cells in popula- tion), allowing for an increase in inferences of causality. To evaluate the importance of these features, we created the following variations on our original data set: (i) an observation-only data set (that is, without any interventional data) of 1200 data points; (ii) a population- averaged (that is, a simulated Western blot) data set; and (iii) a truncated individual-cell data set of size comparable to the simulated Western blot data set (that is, the original data set with most of the data randomly excluded network inference was perform- ed on each set of data. The network inferred from 1200 observational data points included only 10 arcs, all undirected, of which 8 were expected or reported, and 10 arcs were missing (fig. S4A). This result demonstrates that inter- ventions are critical for effective inference, particularly to establish directionality of the connections (Fig. 1B). The truncated single- cell data set (420 data points) shows a large (11-arc) decline in accuracy, missing more connections and reporting more unexplained arcs than its larger (5400 data points) counter- part (fig. S4B). This result emphasizes the importance of sufficiently large data set size in network inference. The network inferred from averaged data (fig. S4C) shows a fur- ther five-arc decline in accuracy relative to that inferred from an equal number of single- cell data points, emphasizing the importance single-cell data. The fact that population averaging destroys some of the signals pre- sent in the data may reflect the presence of heterogeneous cellular subsets that are masked by averaging techniques. shown, we correctly reverse-engineered and rapidly in- ferred the basic structure of a classically under- stood signaling network that connects a number of key phosphorylated proteins in human T cell signaling, a map built by classical biochemistry and genetic analysis over the past two decades. network was automatically constructed with no a priori knowledge of pathway connec- tivity. The application of Bayesian networks to single-cell flow cytometry has distinct ad- vantages, including an ability to measure events in primary cells after in vivo interventions (thus context-specific signaling biology in inference of directed arcs and causal- VOL 308 22 APRIL 2005 T I C L E S therein, and the ability to detect indirect as well as direct connections. This latter point is a powerful feature when the known list of participating molecules may not be exhaus- tive, and can be especially important when networks are used to assess the effects of sys- tem perturbations (as in a pharmaceutical con- text). A limiting step in the experiment is the availability of suitable reagents; currently, there are about 80 antibodies to phosphorylated molecules that are compatible with flow cytom- etry, but this number is expected to rapidly of this approach to other sets of molecules, cell types, disease states, and in- terventions (for example, siRNA and dominant negative screens, or pharmaceutical agents) should enhance our understanding of signaling networks, especially with respect to complex nonlinear cross-talk between pathways. An- other important experimental issue that this approach can address is the differences among specific primary cell types and cell subpopu- lations. The traditional understanding of path- way structures as collated from diverse model cell types and organisms demonstrates the es- sential congruity of basic signaling networks, but does not easily reveal the subtle differ- ences that exist in different primary cell sub- types. It is now possible to appreciate pathway intricacies in primary cell subsets, including those with previously uncharacterized signal- ing molecules. The application of this ap- proach during biochemical interrogation of cellular subset–specific signaling networks in the course of a disease state or in the presence pharmaceutical agents can potentially pro- vide important mechanistic information of clin- ical relevance. For example, this method could identify sets of signaling molecules that ex- plain differences between responses to chemo- the computational aspect, a key advantage of Bayesian networks is that they are relatively robust to the existence of unobserved variables; for example, their abil- ity to detect indirect influences via unmea- sured molecules. At the forefront of Bayesian network research is the development of meth- ods to automatically infer the existence and location of such hidden variables. Although our results were restricted to 11 phosphomo- lecular measurements per cell, the number of simultaneous parameters measured by flow cy- As mea- surement systems improve, and the ability to readily and accurately measure greater num- bers of internal signaling events increases, additional opportunities to discover novel influ- ences and pathway structures become possible. One of the caveats in the use of Bayesian networks for the elucidation of signaling path- ways is that they are restricted to be acyclic, whereas signaling pathways are known to be rich in feedback loops. Indeed, our infer- ence missed three classic arcs, most likely for this reason. Given time series data, dynamic Bayesian networks could potentially capture these feedback loops. To measure the amounts of internal phosphorylated proteins, the cells must be fixed. Therefore, continuous, real-time, simultaneous, multiparameter, single-cell time- The model predicts that an intervention on Erk will To test the predicted relationships, Erk1 and Erk2 were inhibited using Amounts of Akt phos- cells] were as- and amounts of phosphorylated PKA are included as a negative control. When Erk1expression is phosphorylated Akt is reduced to amounts similar to those in unstimulated cells, confirming data cannot be collected with the cur- rent technology. Because Bayesian networks belong to a more general class of probabilistic graphical models, within the formalism of these models it is possible to develop a model that could handle feedback loops, given a series of static time points using the current technology. Although there is much to be developed both computationally and experimentally, by extending the concepts derived here it is clear that simultaneous multivariate analysis of bio- logical states in multiple discrete entities, such as cells, offers a useful approach for rapidly deriving signaling network hierarchies and structures. Extension of this approach to bio- logical systems involving multiple cell pop- ulations, such as solid tissues and organs, or whole-animal studies such as in whole- body fluorescence imaging of phosphoryl- elegans or thin-slice tissue sec- tions from mammalian organs, could allow automated construction of signaling network influences not only within but also across cell boundaries in an increasing number of phys- iological contexts. and Notes APRIL 2005 VOL 308 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org find a target object in a crowded scene, a face in a crowd for example, the system might turn the neural representation of each object on and off a serial fashion, testing each representation against a template of the target item. Alternatively, it might allow the processing of all objects in par- allel but bias activity in favor of those neurons that represent critical fea- tures of the target, until the target emerges from the background. To test these possibilities, we recorded neurons in area V4 of monkeys freely scanning a complex array to find a target defined by color, shape, or both. Throughout the period of searching, neurons gave enhanced responses and synchronized their activity in the gamma range whenever a preferred stimulus in their re- ceptive field matched a feature of the target, as predicted by parallel models. Neurons also gave enhanced responses to candidate targets that were se- lected for saccades, or foveation, reflecting a serial component of visual search. Thus, serial and parallel mechanisms of response enhancement and neural synchrony work together to identify objects in a scene. a crowded visual scene, we typically focus our attention on behaviorally relevant stimuli. When subjects know the location of a relevant object, the brain mechanisms that guide their spatial attention to the object largely overlap with those for selecting the targets for eye The outcome of this selection for attention or eye movements is to enhance the responses of visual cortex neurons to the relevant object, at the expense of distracters As a result, object recognition mecha- nisms in the temporal cortex are typically con- fronted with only a single relevant stimulus However, in most common vi- sual scenes, people rarely know the specific location of the relevant object in advance— instead, they must search for it, based on its distinguishing features, such as color or shape, which is commonly termed visual search. A long-standing issue has been whether object selection in visual search is also mediated by of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD of Psychology, Vanderbilt In- stitute for Brain Research at the Massachusetts In- stitute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: bichotn@mail.nih.gov mechanisms for spatial attention, which scan the objects in the scene sequentially until the target is identified (serial search), whether or not eye movements are made. If so, then visual attention could be broadly served by a unitary mechanism, linked to the neural sys- tems that control gaze. Alternatively, search may be mediated by nonspatial attentional mechanisms that are sensitive to features such as color and shape and that bias visual in favor of neurons that represent the target features throughout the visual field, Search could also be mediated by hybrid mechanisms such and attention to stimuli with particular fea- in brain area V4 have found that neuronal responses to attended target stimuli were enhanced over time, but the studies were not designed to test whether the targets were by serial or parallel neural mech- In one of these studies, monkeys did not search for a specific feature but instead searched for a singleton (i.e., popout) stimulus In an- other study that used backgrounds of natural scenes, the average neural activity throughout trial varied according to the searched-for features, but the authors could not rule T I C L E S that these effects were due to differences in eye scan paths across the scene for differ- ent targets rather than feature-selective effects tested for parallel and serial attentional mechanisms in area V4 in monkeys perform- ing a search task with free gaze. We recorded not only neuronal responses but also the syn- chrony between neuronal responses and the because V4 synchronize their activity when atten- is directed to their receptive fields (RFs) similar to neurons in parietal cortex dur- Such syn- chrony, especially in the gamma frequency range, could potentially amplify their effect on postsynaptic neurons, similar to increases The monkeys freely scanned multielement arrays composed of colored shapes to find a target defined by color or During color feature search (Fig. 1A), the cue was a colored square, and the monkey was rewarded for fixating the stim- ulus in the array that matched the cue color. During shape feature search (fig. S1), the cue was a gray shape, and the monkeys were re- warded for fixating the stimulus in the array that matched the cue shape. When shape was relevant, color was irrelevant, and vice versa. We selected two colors and two shapes as cues for each recording session, on the basis of ini- tial recordings in which we determined a pre- ferred (strong response) and nonpreferred (weak response) color and shape for a given neuron. Overall, monkeys performed similarly dur- color and shape search, finding the target on 86% and 91% of the trials, respectively. Both tasks were demanding, taking an average of 6.3 saccades to find the target out of 20 In separate behavioral studies in which we varied the num- ber of display items, the monkeys took an aver- age of 160 ms per item to find the target, again that the target did not pop out. selection during feature key element of parallel search models is that the neural bias in favor of containing features of the searched-for target occurs throughout the visual field, and throughout the time period of the search, long before a target is identified. Thus, we reasoned that the critical neurons to test for this bias were not the neurons whose RF contained stimulus that was the target for a saccade a given moment. Rather, the critical neurons VOL 308 22 APRIL 2005 date 19 August 2005 “Causal protein-signaling networks derived from multiparame- ter single-cell data” by K. Sachs et al.(22 Apr. 2005, p. 523). The author names in reference (26) were incorrect. The authors are I. M. Ong, J. D. Glasner, D. Page. The URL for the supporting online material was incor- rect; it should be www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/308/5721/523/ DC1. There was also a reference missing in the last sentence of the last paragraph on page 527 that continues on page 528. The new reference (29) is P. O. Krutzik, G. P. Nolan, Cytometry5555, 61 (2003). The acknowl- edgments should now be reference (30). post date 19 AUGUST 2005