World Economic Forum
Annual Meeting 2013

    A more
hopeful

        DAVOS

 

 
A more hopeful Davos 
Delegates at the World Economic Forum’s 2013 Annual Meeting, which took place in 
Davos from 23-27 January, struck a note of cautious optimism1, indicating that while 
the global economic environment remains challenging many of the key tail-risks of the 
past year have begun to recede. 
The mood was sharply different than the previous year’s meeting when expectations of 
slowing global growth and growing fears over US debt, the possible collapse of the 
euro-zone and the possible fallout from the Arab spring fuelled wide-spread pessimism.  
A change in attitudes 
An exploration of five key areas of risks that dominated media and public discussion 
before Davos shows how the mood has shifted.  

1.  Anxiety over the US fiscal cliff has receded since the beginning of the year and most discussions 

and delegates seemed to indicate that while this was a continuing concern they expected a 
resolution would be found during the course of 2013. Indeed, some pundits argued that a 
strengthening housing market and economic boom on the back of shale gas discoveries could help 
the US move out of deficit far sooner than expected. 

2.  Fears of a possible Greek exit from and subsequent collapse of the euro-zone have faded strongly 

and there was broad consensus that intervention by the European Central Bank had reduced tail-
risk in European sovereign markets.  

3.  Stronger than expected fourth quarter growth and the development of domestic demand in the 

country has allayed fears that China will suffer a hard landing. After GDP grew by 7.9 percent in the 
fourth quarter of 2012, ahead of expectations, the country is expected to grow at an average of 
8.8 percent per annum over the next two years. 

4.  The Middle East did not get as much air time during this year’s Davos as it did in 2012, despite the 

civil war in Syria, widening tensions and a regime change in Israel, and reports of civil unrest in 
Egypt. One area of concern was the possibility that as the US heads towards energy independence, 
possibly by 2020, it will scale back its presence on the world stage, creating a real need for other 
powers to step up and show leadership in the region. 

5.  There was also considerably less focus on the food-water-energy nexus, though this topic was 

addressed more broadly in a range of discussions around the subject of resilience, a key theme this 
year.  

 

 

                                                   
1 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kR7qATj9gm4 
 
 
 

 

 
Despite the generally more positive outlook, however, CEOs and political leaders remain 
convinced that economic growth will remain slow in 2013 and that political, social and 
economic environment will remain challenging. Nouriel Roubini summed up the 
sentiment in an interview 2 in which he declared the euro-zone was “less worse” than it 
had been in the Summer of 2012. 
An annual survey3 by PWC conducted in October, 2012, showed CEO confidence had 
dipped to 36 percent from 40 percent in the previous year with a strong consensus 
that the economic environment in 2013 will be similar to the previous year, albeit with 
slightly higher growth. 
Some of the key concerns were over current global economic  levels of growth, 
Europe’s persistent trade imbalance, the inability of governments to address key policy 
issues, increasing regulation, and the growing skills gap in some industries. Many 
politicians and other commentators urged businesses to commit capital to growth while 
businesses leaders were inclined to invest in resilience. 
The path to future growth 
Davos 2013 revolved around the theme “Resilient Dynamism”, with a clear focus on the 
necessary measures to restore global confidence and encourage “leaders from the 
public and private sectors to adopt a “risk-on” mindset to catalyze dynamic growth”.  
The need to restore public trust in business and government was a recurring issue after 
an annual survey, the 2013 Edelman Trust Barometer4, revealed that just 18 percent of 
people trust companies to tell the truth and only 13 percent trust their government to 
do so.  
Speaking in a Time panel discussion entitled “Leading Through Adversity”5, Zurich’s 
Chief Executive Martin Senn addressed the trust issue and spoke of the need for “ 
balance in leadership, both political leadership and business leadership, as leaders have 
to show that they truly understand the risks we are facing.”  
In the same panel discussion, Harvard Professor of Business Administration Clayton 
Christensen addressed the issue of slowing innovation, explaining that a strong focus on 
innovations in business and operating efficiency that cut costs and jobs was reducing 
                                                   
2 http://www.businessinsider.com/roubini-says-eurozone-less-worse-2013-1 
3 http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-survey/index.jhtml 
4 http://www.edelman.com/tag/2013-edelman-trust-barometer/ 
5 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tm50929wbaA 
 
 

 

 

emphasis and spending on so-called “empowering” innovations that create jobs and new 
markets. Anand Mahindra, Chairman and Managing Director of Mahindra & Mahindra, 
weighed in, arguing that the world was on the cusp of a new wave of innovation out of 
Asia as companies like Samsung move from being market followers to market leaders. 
The panelist also addressed the need for leaders to be willing to take business risks. 
Zurich’s Martin Senn warned that, “Before anyone takes any risk, you have to have a 
reasonable expectation on the return you’re going to generate. We have at the moment 
not enough clarity as a function of the economic crisis on what return you could expect. 
It is very, very difficult to be gutsy about it.” Others were more bullish, however, with 
Cisco Chairman and Chief Executive John Chambers arguing “if you’re in an environment 
where you don’t take risks and don’t push innovation, you will get left behind very 
quickly”. 
The employment gap 
Another issue discussed in this panel, was the growing need to address rising 
unemployment and the growing skills gap. Harvard’s Clayton Christensen raised the 
point that the world needs to create 200 million new jobs in the next decade and 
warned that while there are 75 million unemployed people around the world there are 
currently 10 million positions globally that could not be filled due to a lack of skills.  
This was a recurring theme across Davos, with a number of discussions6 on the growing 
gap between education and the needs of business7, the need for new innovation and 
investment to drive job creation, the risk of a “lost generation” in countries afflicted by 
high youth unemployment, and unemployment as a driver of social unrest in the Middle 
East and other countries. In one session, a senior human resources executive from IBM 
said the company had nearly 7,000 unfilled positions and a shortfall of nearly 3,500 
engineers, despite offering extremely attractive starting salaries and incentives. 
Climate change and flood resilience 
The environment also took center stage. In a session on catastrophic risks hosted by 
the Wharton School it was pointed out that Thailand and New York are placing far 
greater emphasis on flood resilience after the flooding of Bangkok in 2011 and super-
storm Sandy. Panelists argued that this resilience would come mostly from stockpiling 
spare parts for key infrastructure likely to be flooded by weather, delinking redundancy, 
and ensuring that all systems, institutions and agencies interact properly.  
                                                   
6 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XdV8U3Z_lWY 
7 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8gR49Ln5VE 
 
 
 

 

 
In an interactive session on 'Global Risks - Climate Change 2013”, Daniel Glaser, the 
President and Chief Executive of Marsh & McLennan, talked of the need to create a 
“cognitive risk awareness” of climate change, in much the same way that drink driving 
and smoking in public places had become unacceptable. 
That discussion also resolved around the need for adaptation versus mitigation – it was 
argued that while insurance can help mitigate climate change it cannot drive the 
necessary changes in human behavior, consumption and interaction to address the 
growing risks. Separately, it was argued that a further 3-5 percent worsening of climate 
change would be a trigger for mass migration in some parts of the world. 
In a separate session, one panelist asked jokingly how China will adapt to climate change 
when the smog gets too bad for the sun to reach the solar panels. 
The China context 
There were also sessions on China8 and, separately, its role in East Asia. There were 
signs of increased confidence in China’s economy, with evidence of growing domestic 
demand including reports of over a trillion RMB spent on-line in the past year and an 11 
percent increase in the income of China’s “peasants”. There was a relatively small 
Chinese delegation at the WEF but they demonstrated considerable confidence in 
China’s future. 
Nevertheless, the consensus was that the country still needs to address a number of 
challenges, including: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

reducing state ownership of industry from its current level which  is in excess of  50 percent 
further costly rural reform 
significant reform of the banking sector 
addressing environmental issues – it was noted that rising costs were already driving material 
efficiencies in the building industry 
a shift in the rule of law from state rights to individual rights 
fiscal reform including freeing up interest rates 
improving the liquidity and openness of equity markets to encourage venture capital and private 
equity 
education innovation to drive creativity and create a service economy 
develop its diplomatic efforts to resolve regional tensions. 

                                                   
8 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqdEnmEAaQ0 
 
 
 

 

One statistic that stood out was that in 2000 US labor costs were 22 times that of 
China while today they are just four times, implying that China’s era of growth through 
manufacturing is near an end. 
The discussion also touched on the relationship between China and the US, with one 
commentator citing a 1962 speech by John F Kennedy9 in with the US president called 
for countries to make the shift from declaring their independence to recognizing their 
“interdependence--not the individual liberty of one but the indivisible liberty of all”. 
Cyber risks 
A final area of discussion, and a perennial theme in the World Economic Forum’s annual 
Global Risk Report10, was the growing threat of cyber-attacks.  
Experts in a panel on cyber resilience warned that attacks were on the rise and talked of 
the need for a holistic approach to address these challenges, including greater 
government involvement, closer cooperation between international agencies, initiatives 
to raise public awareness, and the need to develop skills and technical understanding to 
counter cyber-risks. 
Separately, Zurich’s Chairman for Asia Pacific, Middle East and Africa, Geoff Riddell, was 
a rapporteur11 on a panel on “Digital Wildfires”12, the risk that a damaging story that 
may or may not be true can spread on social media. The example cited was Orson 
Welles 1938 War of the Worlds broadcast which created public panic over an imaginary 
invasion. Other examples, include false images of the flooding of the New York Stock 
Exchange, which circulated over social media sites during super storm Sandy and the 
use of falsified images of torture to heighten feelings in a conflict zone on the borders 
of Myanmar. 
The panel highlighted the need for strong validation of media sources and greater public 
education, particularly in regions which rely on wrote learning where people are less 
likely to evaluate information critically. It also pointed to the benefits of social media, 
for example in bringing about political change.  

                                                   
9 http://www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/RrjaDhW5B0OYm2zaJbyPgg.aspx 
10 http://www.weforum.org/issues/global-risks 
11 http://reports.weforum.org/global-risks-2013/view/risk-case-1/digital-wildfires-in-a-hyperconnected-world/ 
12 http://www.weforum.org/videos/insight-global-risks-2013-digital-wildfires-hyperconnected-world 
 
 

 

